Ifill: A SITTING MEMBER
OF CONGRESS, NEW YORK
REPRESENTATIVE MICHAEL GRIMM,
WAS ARRESTED TODAY ON A RANGE OF
FEDERAL CHARGES.
THE TWO-TERM REPUBLICAN PLEADED
NOT GUILTY TO A 20-COUNT
INDICTMENT, INCLUDING MAIL
FRAUD, WIRE FRAUD AND
TAX FRAUD.
IT ALLEGES HE UNDER-REPORTED AND
CONCEALED WAGES FOR WORKERS AT
A MANHATTAN RESAN
GRIMM IS A FORMER FBI AGENT
WHO'S ALSO UNDER INVESTIGATION
FOR CAMPAIGN FINANCE VIOLATIONS.
SUICIDE BOMBERS KILLED AT LEAST
50 PEOPLE ACROSS  IRAQ TODAY,
AHEAD OF WEDNESDAY'S
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS.
THE WORST ATTACK CAME AT A
KURDISH RALLY 100 MILES
NORTHEAST OF BAGHDAD.
30 PEOPLE DIED THERE.
OTHER ATTACKERS HIT POLLING
STATIONS WHERE SOLDIERS AND
SECURITY FORCES BEGAN CASTING
BALLOTS.
PRISONERS AND HOSPITAL WORKERS
ALSO VOTED TODAY.
THE NATIONAL ELECTIONS ARE THE
FIRST IN IRAQ SINCE US TROOPS
WITHDREW IN 2011.
HUNDREDS MORE ISLAMISTS HAVE
BEEN SENTENCED TO DEATH
IN EGYPT, IN THE LATEST
MASS TRIAL OF MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
SUPPORTERS.
A COURT IN CAIRO IMPOSED THE
PENALTY TODAY IN A CASE STEMMING
FROM VIOLENT RIOTS LAST AUGUST.
JONATHAN MILLER OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS REPORTS.
>> Reporter: THE EGYPTIAN
JUDICIARY ON TRIAL TODAY AS A
NOTORIOUS HANGING JUDGE BROKE
HIS OWN GRIM RECORD,
RECOMMENDING THAT 688 MEN BE
SENTENCED TO DEATH IN A TRIAL
THAT LASTED TEN MINUTES.
SAID YOUSSEF TODAY ALSO UPHELD
THE DEATH PENALTY ON 37 OF THE
529 HE CONDEMNED LAST MONTH.
THE REMAINDER COMMUTED TO 25
YEARS IN JAIL.
DISTRESS AMONG RELATIVES OUTSIDE
THE CAIRO COURTROOM THIS
MORNING.
YOU CAN HEAR OTHERS SCREAMING AS
THIS MOTHER TALKS OF HER SON.
>> I SWEAR TO GOD HE DID
NOTHING.
THE OFFICER CAME AND ARRESTED
HIM WHEN HE WAS ASLEEP IN BED.
>> Reporter: AMONG OTHERS
SENTENCED TO HANG, THE 70 YEAR
OLD SPIRITUAL GUIDE OF THE
OUTLAWED MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD,
MOHAMED BADIE, ON CHARGES OF
INCITING VIOLENCE.
LAWYERS AND HUMAN RIGHTS GROUPS
TODAY CONDEMNED THE TRIAL.
NOT FAIR, THEY SAID.
NO DUE PROCESS.
>> THE RIGHT TO A DEFENSE WAS
BREACHED.
IN A NORMAL CASE WITH A
DEFENDANT THAT KILLED SOMEONE IT
WOULD TAKE ONE OR TWO YEARS.
BUT HERE IT WAS WRAPPED UP IN
ONE SESSION.
>> TAKE STOSK WHAT HAS BEEN
HAPPENING IN EGYPT.
LESS THAN A YEAR AGO MOHAMMED
MORSI WAS PRESIDENT.
TODAY HE IS IN JAIL.
2500 OF HIS SUPPORTERS ARE DEAD.
THE MOVEMENT DESIGNATED A
TERRORIST ORGANIZATION.
BY THIS TIME NEXT MONTH, GENERAL
ASISI, THE EX MILITARY
INTELLIGENCE CHIEF UNDER THE
DICTATOR HOSNI MUBARAK,  IS
EXPECTED TO HAVE EASILY WON
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS.
BACK TO THE FUTURE.
TODAY SIXTH OF APRIL DEMOCRATIC
ACTIVIST GROUP WHICH SPEARHEADED
THE REVOLT AGAINST MUBARAK THREE
YEARS AGO WAS OUTLAWED.
IT'S TWO LEADERS ARE ALREADY IN
JAIL.
ALL BUT 68 OF THOSE SENTENCED
TODAY WERE TRIED IN ABSENTIA.
THE JUDGE'S DECISION WILL NOW BE
APPEALED TO EGYPT'S TOP ISLAMIC
OFFICIAL, THE GRAND MUFTI.
IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
THERE'S WORD THAT MUSLIM REBELS
SHOT UP A HOSPITAL OVER THE
WEEKEND, KILLING AT LEAST 16
E LOCAL WORKERS WITH
"DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS".
IT HAPPENED IN A TOWN IN THE
REMOTE, NORTHWESTERN SECTION OF
THE COUNTRY, NEAR THE BORDER
WITH CHAD.
THE REBELS HAVE REGROUPED IN
THAT REGION AFTER BEING DRIVEN
FROM THE CAPITAL CITY OF BANGUI.
PRESIDENT OBAMA
0-YEAR AGREEMENT WITH THENG --
PHILIPPINES, ALLOWING US FORCES
GREATER ACCESS TO MILITARY
BASES.
THE PACT WAS SIGNED
AS HE ARRIVED IN MANILA TO MEET
WITH PRESIDENT BENIGNO AQUINO.
THE NEWS ALSO SPARKED PROTESTS
BY HUNDREDS OF FILIPINO
ACTIVISTS, OPPOSED TO ANY
RENEWED US MILITARY PRESENCE.
THEY BURNED EFFIGIES
OF BOTH LEADERS.
MR. OBAMA MAINTAINED THE MOVE
WILL BE GOOD FOR THE REGION.
>> I WANT TO BE VERY CLEAR:  THE
UNITED STATES IS NOT TRYING TO
RECLAIM OLD BASES OR BUILD NEW
BASES.
AT THE INVITATION OF THE
PHILIPPINES, AMERICAN SERVICE
MEMBERS WILL ROTATE THROUGH
FILIPINO FACILITIES, WILL TRAIN
AND EXERCISE MORE TOGETHER SO
WE'RE PREPARED FOR A RANGE OF
CHALLENGES INCLUDING
HUMANITARIAN CRISES AND NATURAL
DISAFTER THERES.
>> Ifill: IT'S AIMED AT
COUNTERING AGGRESSIVE CHINESE
MOVES IN THE REGION.
IT'S BEEN FIVE WEEKS SINCE THE
WASHINGTON STATE MUDSLIDE,
AND TODAY, AUTHORITIES
OFFICIALLY ENDED
THE ACTIVE SEARCH FOR BODIES.
THE DEATH TOLL IN THE SHATTERED
COMMUNITY OF OSO REMAINS AT 41.
TWO PEOPLE ARE STILL LISTED
AS MISSING.
A FORENSIC TEAM BEGAN SCHORG A
TINY CHURCH IN MADRID TODAY
HUNTING REMAINS OF SPAIN'S
GREATEST WRITER WHO DIED IN
OBSCURITY IN 1616 YEARS AFTER
HIS CLASSIC NOVEL ABOUT THE HE
CAN SEC TRICK NIGHT DON QUEE
HAUTE YEAH.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED
87 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,448.
THE NASDAQ FELL
A POINT TO CLOSE
AT 4074.
AND THE S-AND-P 500
WAS UP 6 TO FINISH
AT 1869.
STILL TO COME
ON THE "NEWSHOUR"...
SEVERE STORMS
LINED UP AGAIN
THIS AFTERNOON
ACROSS THE SOUTH,
AND A TORNADO
DAMAGED SOME HOMES
IN TUPELO, MISSISSIPPI,
BUT THERE WERE NO INITIAL
REPORTS OF INJURIES.
THAT'S AFTER AT LEAST
16 PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN THREE
STATES
ON SUNDAY, 14 OF THEM IN
ARKANSAS...
>> OH WOW, GUYS.
>> Woodruff: THE SKY OVER
MAYFLOWER, ARKANSAS, WENT FROM
LIGHT TO DARK IN AN INSTANT LAST
EVENING.
THESE STORM CHASERS GOT TOO
CLOSE FOR COMFORT TO A HALF-
MILE-WIDE TORNADO.
>> MY EARS ARE POPPING, WE'RE IN
IT RIGHT NOW, WE'RE IN THE
TORNADO"
>> Woodruff: FROM THERE, THE
TWISTER MOVED DOWN THE ROAD TO
NEARBY VILONIA, NORTH OF LITTLE
ROCK.
>> AS I WAS DRIVING BACK I SAW
NOTHING BUT BLACK, IT WAS HUGE
AND I SAW THE ROTATION.
>> Woodruff: THE TORNADO TOUCHED
DOWN OFF-AND-ON FOR ALMOST 80
MILES, LEAVING DESTRUCTION ALONG
AN ALREADY WELL-BEATEN PATH.
>> THREE YEARS AND TWO DAYS AGO
WE WERE HIT BY AN EF2 TORNADO,
PRACTICALLY THE SAME PATH, IN
FACT THIS RAN RIGHT ALONG THE
SIDE WHERE THE OTHER ONE CAME,
CUT ABOUT 6 1/2 MILES LONG
>> Woodruff: THIS MORNING, IN
THE LIGHT OF DAY, THE SCOPE OF
DESTRUCTION CAME FULLY INTO
VIEW.
METAL WRAPPED AROUND TREE LIMBS
THAT HAD BEEN HACKED OFF IN THE
HIGH WINDS;
HOMES LEFT WITH NO ROOFTOPS;
CARS TWISTED AND BENT;
AND AMID ALL THIS, RESCUE TEAMS,
SEARCHING THE WRECKAGE FOR
SURVIVORS.
>> WE'VE GOT PEOPLE AND DOGS
GOING THROUGH THE RUBBLE AND
TRYING TO FIND WHOEVER WE CAN
AND WHATEVER WE CAN.
>> Woodruff: THE NATIONAL GUARD
AND THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AGENCY WERE ON THE
GROUND TO ASSIST, AND PRESIDENT
OBAMA PLEDGED MORE FEDERAL HELP.
GOVERNOR MIKE BEEBE SIZED THINGS
UP AFTER GETTING A FIRST-HAND
LOOK.
>> WE'VE OBVIOUSLY GOT A LOT OF
EXPERIENCE WITH TORNADOS.
ANY TORNADO IS BAD, PARTICULARLY
IF IT'S A DIRECT HIT ON
SOMETHING BUT LOOKING AT THE
DAMAGE THIS MAY BE ONE OF THE
STRONGEST THAT WE'VE SEEN.
>> Woodruff: IN FACT,
FORECASTERS SAID THE ARKANSAS
TORNADO WAS LIKELY THE STRONGEST
ANYWHERE IN THE COUNTRY THIS
YEAR.
ANOTHER TWISTER TORE THROUGH
QUAWPAW, OKLAHOMA AND KILLED ONE
PERSON.
THIS MAN SAID THERE WAS NO
WARNING.
>> NO SIRENS OR ANYTHING WENT
OFF THERE, AND I FELT THE HOUSE
SHAKE A LITTLE BIT, AND I HEARD
WIND LIKE YOU WOULD NOT BELIEVE.
SO I GOT UP OFF MY CHAIR AND
LOOKED OUT MY FRONT WINDOW AND
ABOUT THE TIME THERE WE SAW THE
TWISTING ACTION RIGHT HERE, ALL
THIS DEVASTATION HERE COMING UP.
>> Woodruff: THE FATALITIES FROM
THESE STORMS MARK THE FIRST OF
THE 2014 TORNADO SEASON.
>> Woodruff: AS WE SAID,
GOVERNOR BEEBE VISITED THE
AFFECTED SITES TODAY.
HE JOINED US FROM
LITTLE ROCK A SHORT TIME AGO.
GOVERNOR MIKE BEEBE THANK YOU
VERY MUCH FOR TALKING WITH US.
FIRST OF ALL WE'RE SO SORRY FOR
THE LOSS OF LIFE.
>> WELL, THANK YOU, JUDY.
IT'S A TRAGEDY ANY TIME YOU SEE
THESE DISASTERS, BUT I ASSUME
YOU HAVE SEEN A NUMBER OF
PICTURES OF THE DAMAGE.
AND BASICALLY IT'S A SURPRISE
THAT WE DON'T LOSE MORE LIVES.
I THINK IT'S A CREDIT TO A LOT
OF FOLKS, INCLUDING THE NEWS
MEDIARO THE WEATHER
SERVICE THAT BROADCASTS THE
WARNINGS AS WELL AS SIRENS AND
PEOPLE BEING MORE ALERT AND MORE
AWARE.
>> Woodruff: BASED ON WHAT YOU
WERE ABLE TO SEE TODAY, HOW BAD
WAS THIS STORM?
>> WE'VE SEEN STORMS THAT
COVERED MORE AREA, WE'VE SEEN
STORMS WITH GREATER COVERAGE IN
TERMS OF DESTRUCTION, BUT IN THE
AREAS WHERE THIS PARTICULAR
TORNADO HIT, I DON'T KNOW THAT
I'VE EVER SEEN ANYTHING THAT WAS
AS STRONG.
WE SAW STEEL BEAMS THAT WERE
TWISTED AND TORN.
IN ONE AREA, WE SAW A STEAL BEAM
ANCHORED IN CEMENT AS AN ANCHOR
FOR THE BUILDING AND THE CEMENT
AND THE ANCHOR, ALL OF IT, WAS
ACTUALLY PULLED OUT FROM THE
GROUND AND TWISTED.
THE DEVASTATION IN TERMS OF THE
VIOLENCE OF THIS TORNADO
PROBABLY IS AS BAD AS I'VE SEEN.
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONED THE
ADVANCE WARNING PEOPLE HAD.
WHAT WOULD PEOPLE HAVE HAD TO DO
IN THE WORST HIT SECTIONS
UNDERSTOOD TO -- IN ORDER TO
STAY SAFE?
>> WELL, THOSE THAT HAD THE SAFE
ROOMS, AND IN ONE COMMUNITY THIS
WAS THE SECOND TIME THAT
COMMUNITY WAS HIT.
SO THAT COMMUNITY WAS MORE
ATTUNED TO SAFETY PRECAUTIONS,
AND A LOT OFM HAVE SAFETY
ROOMS.
THERE WERE ALSO SAFE SHELTERS
YOU COULD GET TO WITH SUFFICIENT
WARNING.
AND ABSENT THAT, THE INTEAR
PORTIONS OF THEIR -- INTERIOR
PORTIONS OF THEIR HOMEMENT WE
HEARD A MAN WITH THREE DAUGHTERS
AND THEY GOT IN THE BATHTUB AND
THE ENTIRE HOUSE WAS IN
SHAMBLES, NOTHING STANDING IN
THE HOUSE AND THEY ALL SURE
VIEFD BECAUSE THE BATHTUB WAS
PICKED UP AND TURNED OVER.
IT WAS SUFFICIENT PROTECTION
THAT THEY ONLY HAD MINOR
SCRATCHES.
ON THE OTHER HAND WE HAD A
SITUATION WHERE A LADY BUILT AN
ACTUAL TORNADO STRUCTURE SAFE
ROOM IN THE HOME.
THE HOME WAS GONE, THE ONLY
THING LEFT STANDING WAS THE SAFE
ROOM BUT SHE PERISHED.
THE APPARENTLY WAS THAT
SOME DEBRIS HIT THE DOOR TO THAT
SAFE ROOM AND CAME ON IN.
>> Woodruff: ARE PEOPLE
GETTING THE HELP THEY NEED FROM
LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL
AGENCIES?
>> YES, YES.
WE'RE RESILIENT PEOPLE.
I THINK MOST STATES.
I LIKE TO BRAG BUT I SUSPECT
MOST STATES FOLLOW THE SAME
PATTERN.
NEIGHBORS AND FRIENDS AND
VOLUNTEERS AND LOAM LAW
ENFORCEMENT AS WELL AS STATE
AGENCIES, STATE POLICE, THE
VARIOUS STATE AGES THAT HAVE
HEAVY EQUIPMENT THAT CAN MOVE
DEBRIS OUT OF THE WAY, CERTAINLY
THE NATIONAL GUARD, AND ALL THE
OTHER AGENCIES SUCH AS FORESTRY
AND HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT AND
CERTAINLY GAME AND FISH AND
PARKS AND TOURISM.
THEY ALL BAND TOGETHER, THEY ARE
WELL COORDINATED AND ON THE
SECOND BASE VERY, VERY QUICKLY.
IN THIS -- ON THE SCENE VERY,
VERY QUICKLY.
IN THIS CASE IT HAPPENED DURING
THE NIGHTTIME HOURS AND IT WAS
DIFFICULT TO SEE, SO THEY ALL
WORKED TOGETHER TO TRY TO FIRST
CLEAR THE WAY SO THAT RESCUE AND
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS COULD GET
INTO THE AREAS, AND THEN
SECONDLY BE ABLE TO DO THE
SEARCH AND RESCUE.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY GOVERNOR
WE KNOW THERE ARE MORE TORNADOES
REPORTED TODAY, THAT TOUCHED
TODAY IN THE SOUTHEAST.
MORE WARNINGS POSTED FOR
TOMORROW.
WHAT SORT OF PREPARATIONS ARE IN
PLACE MOVING FORWARD?
>> WELL, OF COURSE, THE GOOD
NEWS FOR US IS THAT MOST OF THIS
US.WEATHER PATTERN HAS PASSED
BAD NEWS IS, AS YOU POINTED OUT
IT'S GOING TO HIT OTHER STATES.
OUR SISTER STATES EAST OF US
HAVE SUFFERED SIGNIFIC
TORNADIC ACTIVITY.
WHAT THEY NEED TO DO IS THE SAME
THING THAT THEY ALWAYS KNOW HOW
TO DO AND THE SAME THING WE DO,
MONITOR THE WEATHER, PAY
ATTENTION TO THE WARNINGS, TAKE
SHELTER WHEN THEY TELL YOU TO.
DON'T TRY TO BE SOMETHING YOU
ARE NOT IN TERMS OF RIDING OUT A
STORM.
TAKE IT SERIOUSLY AND MOVE TO
PLACES OF SAFETY WHEN AT ALL
POSSIBLE.
>> Woodruff: GOOD WARNING FOR
EVERYONE TO KEEP IN MIND IN THE
PATH OF THESE STORMS.
GOVERNOR MIKE BEEBE OF ARKANSAS,
WE THANK YOU.
>> YOU ARE MORE THAN WELCOME.
>> Ifill: TENSIONS IN EASTERN
UKRAINE SPILLED OVER INTO MORE
VIOLENCE TODAY.
AS THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS
ON RUSSIAN LEADERS AND COMPANIES
WITH CLOSE TIES TO PRESIDENT
PUTIN.
LINDSEY HILSUM OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: TONIGHT THOSE WHO
SUPPORT UKRAINE HELD A MARCH IN
THE EASTERN TOWN OF DONETSK,
PROTECTED, SUPPOSEDLY, BY THE
POLICE.
BUT PRO-RUSSIAN THUGS SOON
DISRUPTED THE RALLY, BEATING UP
DEMONSTRATORS WITH BATONS AND
STONES, SEVERAL WERE INJURED,
AND THE DEMONSTRATORS FORCED TO
FLEE.
THOSE AGITATING IN FAVOR OF
RUSSIA DENY THEY'RE DOING
MOSCOW'S BIDDING BUT THE US
GOVERNMENT SEES PRESIDENT
PUTIN'S HAND  AND TODAY IMPOSED
FURTHER SANCTIONS ON SOME OF THE
RUSSIAN LEADER'S CLOSEST
FRIENDS.
17 COMPANIES ARE SANCTIONED
INCLUDING SOME CONTROLLED BY
PUTIN ASSOCIATES:
GENNADY TIMCHENKO, A
BILLIONAIRE;
AND ARKADY ROTENBERG, HIS OLD
JUDO PARTNER AND CHILDHOOD
FRIEND.
AMONGST THE SEVEN INDIVIDUALS
SANCTIONED ARE:
DMITRY KOZAK, DEPUTY PRIME
MINISTER OF THE RUSSIAN
FEDERATION;
IGOR SECHIN, THE PRESIDENT OF
ROSNEFT, THE WORLD'S LARGEST
TRADED OIL COMPANY.
SECHIN, ONE OF PRESIDENT PUTIN'S
CLOSETS ADVISORS, IS SANCTIONED
AS AN INDIVIDUAL BUT IT'S HARD
TO SEPARATE THE MAN FROM THE
COMPANY, ROSNEFT.
HERE HE IS A YEAR AGO WITH THE
HEAD OF B.P., BOB DUDLEY.
>> LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, IT'S
GREAT FOR ME TO WELCOME IGOR
IVANOVICH HERE AT B.P. TODAY.
I THINK THIS IS THE BEGINNING
TODAY OF A GREAT PARTNERSHIP
BETWEEN B.P. AND ROSNEFT.
>> Reporter: B.P. HAS A 20%
STAKE IN ROSNEFT, TO WHICH IT
SAID TODAY IT REMAINED
COMMITTED.
ROSNEFT SAID THE SANCTIONS
WOULDN'T AFFECT COOPERATION WITH
ITS PARTNERS, BUT THE COMPANY
SHARE PRICE DROPPED AS DID ITS
CREDIT RATING.
IN THE CITY OF KHARKIV TODAY,
THE DEPUTY MAYOR WAS SHOT IN THE
BACK, AS UKRAINE GROWS MORE
LAWLESS THE E.U. IS TO ANNOUNCE
FURTHER SANCTIONS ON RUSSIA
TOMORROW.
EUROPE IS ONE STEP BEHIND THE
U.S., BECAUSE OF ITS CLOSER
ECONOMIC TIES TO RUSSIA, BUT
THEY'RE TRYING TO GIVE AN
IMPRESSION OF UNITY.
EARLIER TODAY THERE WAS ANOTHER
TOWN TO JOIN THE REPUBLIC AS
PRORUSSIAN DEMONSTRATORS TOOK
OVER THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATION
BUILDING.
WESTERN SANCTIONS MAY BE HURTING
SOME RUSSIAN INDIVIDUALS, BUT
THERE'S NO SIGN THAT THEY ARE
DETERRING PRESIDENT PUTIN FROM
CONTINUING TO STIR IT UP IN
UKRAINE.
>> Ifill: NOW FOR MORE WE TURN
TO WHITE HOUSE DEPUTY NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISOR TONY BLINKEN. T
RUSSIA TO IMPE A CLEAR
HOIS ON PRESIDENT PUTIN.
ESOLVE THIS CRISIS INC
UKRAINE OR FACESE SIIFICTIMPAS
FROM THE PRESSURE WE'VE EXERTED
TO DATE.
FINANCIAL MARKETS DOWN 22%.
RUBLE AT ALL TI W DRYINP, UVER R
THE PEOPLE, WHICH IS C
Ifill: F RT OION GOV
WT ISHA THEPOIN AVE DESIGT
ND A
MR. SESSIO ANDNOTH A.
HEOLON THES STOCK PRICE
TAKE A DIVE AS WELL.
IT'S HAVING A CLEAR IMPACT AND
FORCING A CLEAR CHOICE.
>> Ifill: WHY SANCTION
INDIVIDUALS AND NOT THE COMPANY
IF WHAT YOU ARE AFTER IS THE
COMPANY?
>> WE'RE LOOKING TO DO THIS IN A
DELIBERATE WAY, TO DOIT
PACTIS GATER AND STRONGER.
SO THE PRESIDENT HAS BEEN
EXTREMELY FOCUSED ON MAKING SURE
THAT WE HAVE THE EUROPEANS WITH
US.
WHILE HE WAS IN ASIA HE CONVENED
A CONFERENCE CALL WITH THE
SENIOR EUROPEAN PARTNERS ON
FRIDAY.
WHEN IT BECAME CLEAR THAT
UNFORTUNATELY RUSSIA WAS NOT
LIVING UP TO THE COMMITMENTS
MADE IN GEEFA.
THERE WAS AN AGREEMENT MADE TO
HAVE THE G-7 PRONOUNCE ITSELF ON
THE NEED FOR ADDITIONAL PRESSURE
AND FOLLOWING THROUGH TODAY.
>> Ifill: IF YOU WERE TO
SANCTION THE COMPANIES
THEMSELVES, WOULD THAT HAVE AN
IMMEDIATE IMPACT ON SATE U.S.
PARTNERS.
EXXON MOBILE IS IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH THEM?
>> WHAT WE'RE FOCUSED ON IS
MAKING SURE WE MAXIMIZE THE
PRESSURE WE'RE EXERTED ON RUSSIA
AND MINIMIZE THE IMPACT HERE IN
THE UNITED STATES AND IN EUROPE.
THAT'S WHY WE'VE DONE IT IN SUCH
A DELIBERATE AND CAREFUL
FASHION.
THAT IS THE RESULT TO DATE.
>> Ifill: I COULDN'T TELL
WHETHER IT WAS THE ANSWER TO MY
QUESTION OR NOT.
YOU ARE SAYING THE STEP-BY-STEP
PROCESS IS IN PART TO INSULATE
AMERICAN COMPANIES?
>> IT'S FOCUSED ON EXERTING
PRESSURE ON RUSSIA AND
CES ON AMERICANIMPACT OR
COMPANIES OR EUROPEAN COMPANIES.
LOOK, THE LONGER THIS GOES ON
AND WE'VE HELD  SANCTIONS
IN RESERVE, IF THIS DOES
CONTINUE, THERE WILL BE SPILL
OVER AND AN EFFECT,
UNFORTUNATELY, ON COMPANIES HERE
AND IN EUROPE.
THE OVER RIDING AND OVERWHELMING
IMPACT IS ON RUSH SHASM WE HAVE
NO DESIRE -- RUSSIA.
WE HAVE NO DESIRE TO DO THIS AND
UNFORTUNATELY WE'RE FORCED TO DO
IT BY RUSSIA AND PRESIDENT
PUTIN'S ACTIONS.
WE HOPE HE WILL RECONSIDER.
>> Ifill: AMONG THE
INDIVIDUALS YOU ARE SANCTIONING
DO THEY HAVE ASSETS IN THE U.S.
FROZEN AS A RESULT OF THIS?
AND DO WE KNOW WHAT THAT ADDS UP
TO?
>> SOME OF THEM MAY WELL HAVE
ASSETS IN THE UNITED STATES.
WE'RE LOOKING AT THAT.
THEY'LL BE PROHIBITED FROM
TRAVELING TO THE UNITED STATES.
MOST SIGNIFICANTLY OF ALL U.S.
PERSONS AND U.S. CO
NOT ABLE TO DO BUSINESS WITH
THEM IN THEIR INDIVIDUAL
CAPACITIES.
IT'S SIGNIFICANT BECAUSE NOT
ONLY DOES IT MEAN THAT THEIR
ABILITY TO DO BUSINESS WITH AND
IN THE UNITED STATES IS CUT OFF
BUT IT'S AN CHILLING IMPACT ON
THEIR ABILITY TO DO BUSINESS
ELSEWHERE AROUND THE WORLD.
WE THINK THIS WILL BE VERY
SIGNIFICANT IN TERMS OF
INDIVIDUALS DESIGNATED INCH ONE
OF THE THINGS YOU --
>> Ifill: ONE OF THE THINGS
YOU SUGGEST THAT IF RUSSIA
DECIDES TO CROSS THE BORDER TO
UKRAINE ROBUST SECRETARY TORAL
SANCTIONS WILL FOLLOW.
REQUEST NOT IMPOSE THEM NOW IF
IT'S MEANT TO DETER BAD
BEHAVIOR.
>> THE PRESIDENT PUT IN PLACE A
WAY TO TARGET LARGE SECTORS OF
ECONOMY AND COMPANIES WITHIN
THOSE SECTORS LIKE ENERGY, LIKE
THE FINANCIAL SECTOR, LIKE
MINING.
THE VERY FACT WE ESTABLISHED
THAT MECHANISM, THE PRESIDENT
PLACE WE BELIEVE WILL
AHA DETERRENT EFFECT.
THE PRESIDENT IS CLEAR WE NEED
TO HOLD OPTIONS IN RESERVE IF
RUSSIA PERSISTS IN ACTIONS AND
TAKES ADDITIONAL ACTIONS.
THAT'S WHAT WE HAVE.
HAVING THOSE IN PLACE WITH
RUSSIA KNOWING WE'RE ABLE TO, IF
NECESSARY, TAKE THOSE ACTIONS
WILL HOPEFULLY HAVE A DETERRENT
EFFECT ON WHAT THEY DO AND FOCUS
THEM ON WHAT THEY AGREED TO DO
ALREADY WHICH IS TO FIND A
DIPLOMATIC RESOLUTION,
DEESCALATE THE CRISIS.
>>il BEING
HELD IN RESERVE FOR FURTHER
PUNISHMENT?
>> I'M NOT P GETTING INTO
SPECIFIC COMPANIES OR
INDIVIDUALS GOING FORWARD BUT
WE'VE SEEN THE IMPACT GOING
FORWARD.
YOU CAN IMAGINE GOING FORWARD,
IF NECESSARY WILL HAVE AN EVEN
GREATER IMPACT.
>> Ifill: IT COULD HAVE BEEN
YOU TODAY TALKING TO REPORTERS
REFERRING TO IT AS THE BERMUDA
TRIANGLE OF EASTERN UKRAINE.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
>> YOU'VE SEEN THE IMAGES OF
WHAT IS GOING ON IN EASTERN
UKRAINE.
UNFORTUNATELY THESE PRO-RUSSIAN
GROUPS OF ACCEPT OPERATIVES ARE
SMALL IN NUMBER BUT DOING
EVERYTHING TO DESTABILIZE THE
UKRAINE WITH RUSSIA'S SUPPORT.
WE BELIEVE THEY ARE TRYING TO
DELAY OR DELEGITIMATIZE THE
ELECTIONS SCHEDULED FOR MAY 25.
THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE SHOULD
CHOOSE THEIR OWN FUTURE.
NOT US, NOT RUSSIA, NOT EUROPE
THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE.
THAT'S WHY THE ELECTRICS ARE SO
IMPORTANT.
WE'RE SUPPORTING THE ELECTIONS.
WE WOULD EXPECT RUSSIA TO DO THE
SAME THING.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY, RUSSIA AND
THE GROUPS ITS SUPPORTS ARE
TRYING TO DO JUST THE OP SIS.
>> Ifill: DEPUTY NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISER TONY BLINKEN,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Ifill: FOR A FULLER PICTURE
OF THE HISTORY OF TENSIONS
BETWEEN RUSSIA AND UKRAINE, OUR
TEAM AT PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
TRACED THE CENTURIES-LONG
RELATIONSHIP.
YOU CAN WATCH THAT FULL REPORT
ONLINE.
FOR THAT AND MORE I'M JOINED
MICHAEL MCCANN.
HE IS DIRECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY
OF NEW HAMPSHIRE'S "SPORTS AND
ENTERTAINMENT LAW INSTITUTE,"
AND LEGAL ANALYST FOR "SPORTS
ILLUSTRATED" MAGAZINE.
AND KENNETH SHROPSHIRE IS
DIRECTOR OF THE WHARTON SPORTS
BUSINESS INSTITUTE AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
SHROPSHIRE WE WELCOME YOU BOTH
TO THE NEWSHOUR.
BOTH OF YOU HAVE FOLLOWED THE
BUSINESS OF SPORTS FOR A
LONGTIME.
HOW DO YOU, WHAT IS YOUR
REACTION TO WHAT DONALD
STERILING IS ALLEGED STERLING IS
ALLEGED TO HAVE SAID.
MICHAEL MCCANN, YOU FIRST?
>> AT A STARTING POINT, IT'S
OUTRAGEOUS THAT SOMEONE WOULD
HOLD THESE VIEWS IN 2014, REALLY
ANYTIME BUT PARTICULARLY THESE
DAYS, IT'S A MATTER THE NBA HAS
TO ADDRESS SERIOUSLY.
I WOULD NOT NOTE IT'S NOT AN
EASY PROCESS TO RECONCILE.
I SAY THAT BECAUSE THE NBA HAS
TO APPROACH THIS UNDER THE RULES
OF THE LEAGUE IN ENSURING THAT
IT DOESN'T TAKE ANY STEPS THAT
PROVE TO BE RECORD.
THE RECORDING ITSELF.
THE NBA WANTS TO BE SURE IT'S
AUTHENTIC AND IT HASN'T BEEN
TAMPERED WITH OR SPLICED IN
ANYWAY THAT IS INACCURATE.
THE LEAGUE WANTS TO APPROACH IT
CAUTIOUSLY BUT ISSUE AN
APPROPRIATE SANCTION TO REFLECT
WHAT WAS SAID.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THAT IN A MOMENT BUT KEN,
YOUR REACTION?
>> IT'S NOT SURPRISING.
IF YOU FOLLOW DONALDSTERLING'S
HISTORY THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
IS NOT NEW.
WHAT IS IMPORTANT IS FOR THE
LEAGUE TO RECOGNIZE THAT THIS IS
A MOMENT IN TIME WHERE THEY HAVE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE THE
RULES RIGHT.
IF MICHAEL SAID IT'S DIFFICULT
FOR THEM TO DO THE RIGHT THING.
THERE SHOULD BE A MORALS CLAUSE
FOR OWNERS AS WELL.
THERE SHOULD BE A WAY TO MOVE
SOMEBODY OUT THAT EXPRESSES AND
DELIVERS THAT ACTUALLY ACTS IN
THIS TYPE OF WAY.
BUT IT'S PROVEN TO BE TRUE.
IT'S BEEN SAID THAT THE NBA IS
HANDCUFFED IN HOW RAPIDLY THEY
ARE MOVED TO ENCOURAGE THE
DEINVESTMENT -- DEVESTMENT OF
HIS --
>> Woodruff: I APOLOGIZE.
THERE'S AN AUDIO ISSUE.
MAYBE WE CAN GET THE MIEB PHONE
CLOSER TO YOUR -- MICROPHONE
CLOSE HADR TO YOUR MOUTH.
WE KNOW DOC RIVERS, THE CLIPPERS
COACH, SAID TODAY HE THINKS
THERE'S A STRONG MESSAGE COMING
FROM THE NBA.
WHAT DO YOU EXPECT THEM TO DO.
YOU SAID IT'S COMPLICATED.
WHAT CAN THEY DO?
>> WELL THERE'S DIFFERENT
OPTIONS ON THE TABLE.
ONE IS TO FINE DONALD STERLING.
ISSUE A SANCTION WHERE HE COULD
BE FIND UP TO $1 MILLION.
IT'S A LOT OF MONEY FOR ALMOST
ALL OF US BUT DONALD STERILING
IS REPORTEDLY WORTH IN THE
BALLPARK OF $1.9 BILLION.
I DON'T THEY IF A MILLION DOLLAR
FINE IS GOING TO HAVE THE IMPACT
THAT IS NECESSARY.
THE LEAGUE COULD ALSO SUSPEND
HIM FOR SOME PERIOD OF TIME, A
YEAR PERHAPS, DURING WHICH ESSEX
COMMUNICATED FROM THE FRANCHISE.
HE COULDN'T BE ABLE TO HAVE
COMMUNICATION WITH THE PLAYERS
STAFF, COACHES, WOULDN'T BE ABLE
TO GO TO PRACTICES OR GAMES.
IT'S LIKE A RESTRAINING ORDER.
COSTILL MAKE MONEY OFF THE TEAM.
THE LEAGUE COULD PURSUE A MORE
RADICAL APPROACH BY TRYING TO
FIRST HIM TO SELL THE TREAT BUT
THE LEAGUE CONSTITUTION DOESN'T
LIKELY GIVE THE NBA THAT
AUTHORITY.
IF IT WERE TO PURSUE THAT
DONE YLD STERLING COULD --
DONALD STERLING COULD SUE THE
NBA AND NOT BE LEAVING ANY TIME
SOON.
I THINK THE LEAGUE WILL SAY
DONALD STERLING WON'T BE AROUND
THE REST OF THIS SEASON AND
AFTER WHICH THE LEAGUE WILL MAKE
A MORE DETERMINEATIVE DECISION.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WOULD BE
INVOLVED IN ENDING HIS OWNERSHIP
WHICH WE HEARD MAGIC JOHN
JOHNSON CALLING FOR?
THEY SAID THEY WON'T GO TO THE
GAMES IF HE IS THE OWNER.
>> IT'S A DIFFICULT PROCESS BUT
NOT ONE THAT IS IMPBL.
IF YOU LOOK BACK AT THE HISTORY
OF LEAGUE THERE'S A CASE THAT
FOCUSED ON THE IDEA WHO WAS CAN
BECOME AN OWNER.
THE COURTS EXPRESSED THE IDEA
THAT AS AN EXCLUSIVE CLUB.
THERE'S ONLY 30 PEOPLE PART OF
THIS CLUB.
YOU CAN CHOOSE YOUR PARTNERS
CAREFULLY.
WE DON'T HAVE STRONG CASE LAW
TALKING ABOUT HOW TO UNRAVEL
THAT SITUATION.
THAT'S THE DECISION THE LEAGUE
WOULD WANT TO MAKE TO TAKE THOS.
IT'S NEW TERRITORY.
DON'T EXPRESS A MANNER OTHER
THAN FOR ECONOMIC REASONS.
THIS IS THE CALLENGE THAT ADAM
SILVER IS CONFRONTED IT.
WITH.
IT COULD BE THE PATH TAKE SEASON
ONE OF A SERIES OF SUSPENSIONED.
EVERYBODY IS NOT WITH US
FOREVER.
MATTER OF TIME, THEUNG MAN.
SITUATION WILL CHANGE.SAID, THIO
IMPORTANT ISSUE.
THE ISSUE IS HOW ARE YOU GOINGT.
>> Woodruff: IN THE SHORT
TERM, I UNDERSTAND IN THE LONGER
TERM SOMETHING ELSE COULD
HAPPEN.
MICHAEL MCCANN WHAT STEPS COULD
THE LEAGUE TAKE IF IT DECIDES
SUSPENSE AND A FINE ARE NOT
ENOUGH?
HOW WOULD IT TECHNICALLY LEGALLY
MOVE FORWARD?
AS KEN NOTED IT'S A DIFFICULT
TUASIAVE TO ARGUEHEN WE
KNOW SHALL IT'S A CONFIDENTIAL
DOCUME OWNER TO
LEAVE WHEN HE IS IN
TROUBLE, NOT ABLE TO PAY BILLS.
YOU COULD TAKE AN EXPANSIVE VIEW
OF LANGE BY SAYING SPONSORRERS
ARE CUTTING DEALS WITH THE
CLIPPERS.
THAT IS THREATENING THE CLIPPERS
ANT INDIRECTLY.
IF IT GOESIT'S
UNPRECEDENTED AND UNCHARTED AND
THE LANGUAGE IN THE CONSTITUTION
DOESN'T APPEAR TO AUTHORIZE IT.
WILL HE SUE?
HE FILE A DEFAMATION
LAWSUIT OR BRECH OF CONTRACT OR
ANTITRUST LAWSUIT SAYING THE NBA
AND OTHERS HAVE JOINED HANDS TO
FORCE ME TO SELL MY TEAM AT
BELOW VALUE.
I LOST HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS
WHICH UNDER ANTITRUST LAWS WOULD
BE TROUBLE.
IF THE GOAL IS TO REMOVE DONALD
STERLING FORCING HIM OUT MAY
HAVE THE OPPOSITE EFFECT.
>> Woodruff: WE'RE INTO
SPECULATION TERRITORY HERE
BECAUSE WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THE
LEAGUE IS GOING TO
KEN SROPSHIRE BACK TO YOU, THE
ADVERTISERS NOT JUST CARMAX,
MERCEDES-BENZ, CAR DEALERS AND
OTHERS ARE CUTTING OR SUSPEND
THEIR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE
TEAM.
COULD THAT ECONOMIC EFFECT MORE
DONALD STERLING TO TAKE A STEP
AND SEPARATE HIMSELF?
>> WELL, THE IMMEDIATE ECONOMIC
EFFECT ON THE TEAM WILL BE
NEGLIGIBLE.
THE IDEA THAT IT COULD LAST FOR
THE LONG TERM THAT THAT COULD BE
POINTED TO AS A REASON TO MOVE
FORWARD TO DIVEST THIS
OWNERSHIP INTEREST.
REALISTICALLY WHAT IS
HAPPENING NOW IS MORE OF A
CONVERSATION WITH STERLING IN AN
ATTEMPT TO HAVE A RATIONAL
CONVERSATION TO POINT TO HIM,
WHERE THIS THING
IS GOING TO END UP.WE CAN DO THT
WILL TAKE A LONG PERIOD OF TIME
WHERE THERE'S A LOT OF
DISCOMFORT AND PEOPLE LOSE
A LOT OF MONEY IN THE PROCESS.
>> Woodruff: YOU BELIEVE THAT
IS WHAT IS GOING ON BEHIND THE
SCENES RIGHT NOW?
>> THAT WOULD BE MY BELIEF.
THAT WOULD BE THE MOST
ESTFORP LL AHE PARTIES TO TAKE
IN THIS INSTANCE AND AS PART OF
DILIGENCE PROCESS, I'M SURE
THAT'S WHAT SILVER IS UP TO.
>> Woodruff: KENHRSHRE
AND CHAEL MCCANN WE THANK YOU
BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.TRY'S ECONOMIC
GRTH, AND THE PROSPERITY
OF IT'S CITIZENS?
SOME THINK THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
IS USING THE WRONG YARDSTICK,
PARTICULARLY AMID CONCERNS
ABOUT INCOME INEQUALITY AND
OTHER QUALITY OF LIFE ISSUES.
OUR ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN TAKES A LOOK AT
THE QUARTERLY
REPORT KNOWN AS G.D.P.
BUT FIRST HE HAD TO PENETRATE A
BATCH OF CONFUSING INITIALS.
IS
>> Reporter: IN 1968 THEN-
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE ROBERT
KENNEDY BLASTED OUR COUNTRY'S
MAIN MEASURE OF ECONOMIC
PROGRESS, CALLED G.N.P., IN
THOSE DAYS.
>> IT COUNTS NAPALM AND THE COST
OF A NUCLEAR WARHEAD, YET THE
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT DOES NOT
ALLOW FOR THE HEALTH OF OUR
CHILDREN, THE QUALITY OF THEIR
EDUCATION OR THE JOY OF THEIR
PLAY.
IT MEASURES EVERYTHING IN SHORT,
EXCEPT THAT WHICH MAKES LIFE
WORTHWHILE.
>> Reporter: THESE DAYS WE RELY
ON G.D.P., GROSS DOMESTIC
PRODUCT, G.N.P.'S NEAR PROXY,
WHICH MEASURES THE TOTAL DOLLAR
VALUE OF GOODS AND SERVICES SOLD
IN THE U.S. IN A YEAR, PLUS
EXPORTS, MINUS IMPORTS.
THE MEASURE STILL LEAVES OUT THE
THINGS KENNEDY EMPHASIZED BUT
THAT'S BECAUSE THEY'RE JUST TOO
TOUGH TO MEASURE.
>> THEY'RE VERY LARGE AND
THEY'RE QUITE UNCERTAIN IN THEIR
MAGNITUDES.
>> Reporter: LANDD HE
BUREAU OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,
WHICH TALLIES THE G.D.P. AND THE
DATA HAS BECOME FUNDAMENTAL.
>> IT IS USED BY THE FEDERAL
RESERVE BOARD FOR ECONOMIC
POLICY, OUR CONSUMER INFLATION
RATE COMES FROM THIS.
THE ENTIRE FEDERAL BUDGET IS
BASED ON THE BASELINE THAT COMES
OUT OF B.E.A.'S DATA.
>> G.D.P. HAS BECOME THE KING
ALL STATISTICS.
>> Reporter: THE KING FOR ALMOST
ALL COUNTRIES, ADDS ECONOMICS
WRITER ZACHARY KARABELL.
>> GOVERNMENTS RISE AND FALL ON
THEIR ABILIT
POPULACE'S ABILITY TO SAY, "NO
YOU DIDN'T, AND YOU KNOW, G.D.P.
WENT DOWN UNDER YOUR WATCH."
>> Reporter: BUT HOW DOES
G.D.P.'S STILL-LOFTY STATUS
SQUARE WITH ROBERT KENNEDY'S
1968 CRITIQUE?
OR WITH MORE RECENT EVIDENCE OF
ITS LIMITS, WHICH NOBEL
ECONOMIST JOSEPH STIGLITZ HAS
POINTED OUT.
>> THIRTY YEARS AGO, WE WEREN'T
TALKING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE.
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION WAS
NOT AS IMPORTANT AS IT IS TODAY.
>> Reporter: IN 2009 STIGLITZ
CHAIRED AN INTERNATIONAL PANEL
TASKED WITH FINDING BETTER
MEASURES OF PROGRESS THAT
INCLUDED THE ENVIRONMENT AND
INEQUALITY.
>> G.D.P. HAS BEEN GOING UP PER
CAPITA, BUT MOST AMERICANS ARE
ACTUALLY WORSE OFF, SO MEDIAN
HOUSEHOLD INCOME IS ACTUALLY
FALLING.
>> Reporter: LIKE THEM OR NOT,
BETTER PROSPERITY GAUGES ARE
HARDLY A NOVEL INNOVATION.
SINCE THE 19, IN
THE HIMALAYAS, THE BUDDHIST
KINGDOM OF BHUTAN, WITH G.D.P.
PER PERSON LESS THAN THE CONGO,
HAS USED GROSS NATIONAL
HAPPINESS.
IT'S G.N.H. SCORE TURNS OUT TO
BE AS ELEVATED AS ITS LOCATION.
AND DOWN HERE AT SEA LEVEL,
THERE'S THE G.P.I.
>> IT SIMPLY TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
NOT ONLY OUR ECONOMY, BUT THE
HEALTH OF OUR ENVIRONMENT, THE
>> Reporter: DAVE GOSHORN WORKS
FOR MARYLAND, THE FIRST US STATE
TO ADOPT A METRIC CALLED THE
GENUINE PROGRESS INDICATOR, MADE
UP OF 26 DIFFERENT FACTORS, NINE
OF THEM ENVIRONMENTAL.
HE WALKED US AROUND ANNAPOLIS TO
EXPLAIN
>> WHEN WE CUT DOWN AN ACRE OF
TREES AND PUT A STRIP MALL IN,
THAT STRIP MALL PUTS PEOPLE TO
WORK, TO OUR ECONOMY, OUR TAX
BASE.
ALL THOSE ARE VERY GOOD THINGS.
>> Reporter: AND IT'S G.D.P.
GOING UP AS A RESULT.
>> EXACTLY.
AT THE SAME TIME, IT IS COSTING
US TO CLEAN UP THE WATER THAT IS
DEGRADED AS A RESULT OF TAKING
AWAY THOSE TREES.
WE AS A SOCIETY RECOGNIZE THAT
BUT WE DON'T ACCOUNT FOR THAT IN
G.D.P.
G.P.I. IS A WAY OF DOING THAT.
>> Reporter: THE G.P.I. DOES IT
BY SUBTRACTING AN ESTIMATED
VALUE OF WATER POLLUTION FROM
TOTAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT.
ALSO SUBTRACTED: THE PRESUMED
COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> IN MARYLAND WE HAVE SEA
LEVELS RESULTING IN PART OF
CLIMATE CHANGE IS INCREASING
CONSIDERABLY, A FOOT OVER THE
PAST CENTURY.
>> Reporter: A FOOT RIGHT HERE,
YOU MEAN?
THIS IS A FOOT HIGHER THAN IT
WAS A CENTURY AGO?
>> YES, AND THE BEST PROJECTIONS
ARE THAT THAT RATE WILL INCREASE
OVER THE NEXT CENTURY, FASTER
THAN A FOOT.
THAT HAS MAJOR IMPACTS TO A LOT
OF OUR LOW LYING LAND, ISLANDS,
SHORELINES WHERE PEOPLE LIVE.
FARM FIELDS THAT ARE NOW
INUNDATED WITH SALT WATER THAT
CAN'T PRODUCE CROPS.
>> Reporter: AND HOW DO YOU PUT
A NUMBER ON CROPLESS FIELDS OR
POLLUTED WATER?
>> ECONOMISTS HAVE GONE OUT AND
SURVEYED THE GENERAL PUBLIC AND
ASKED THEM QUESTIONS SUCH AS:
WHAT WOULD YOU BE WILLING TO PAY
TO BRING YOUR LOCAL RIVER UP TO
A STATE WHERE YOU COULD SWIM IN
IT?
>> Reporter: IN A NATIONAL
COMPARISON OF THE MEASURES, GPI
AND G.D.P. GREW TOGETHER UNTIL
ABOUT 1980 WHEN G.P.I.NED.
IN MARYLAND, G.P.I. HA
MODESTLY SINCE THEN BUT IT
TRAILS G.D.P. GROWTH.
>> I HEAR ON THE NEWS ALL THE
TIME, PEOPLE COMMENT ABOUT WHAT
THE ECONOMIC INDICATORS ARE
LOOKING UP OR COMING OUT OF THE
RECESSION.
YOU FREQUENTLY HEAR PEOPLE
COMMENT: BUT I DON'T FEEL ANYBE.
MAY HINGE ON ANOTHER COMPONENT
OF G.P.I.: SOCIAL WELL-BEING.
ANNAPOLIS BEING THE LANDING
PLACE FOR THE HERO OF ALEX
HALEY'S "ROOTS," WE TOOK A
NEXT TO THE AUTHOR TO PROBE THE
VALUE OF LEISURE.
HOW DO YOU CALCUALUE
OF, SAY, ALEX HALEY READING TO
THESE KIDS?
>> IF IT COUNTS AS EDUCATION,
THE VALUE OF AN EDUCATION'S
INCLUDED IN THE G.P.I.
IF YOU COUNT IT AS LEISURE TIME,
NOT HAVING THAT LEISURE TIME
COUNTS AS A LOSS IN THE G.P.I.
AND WE ALSO HAVE THE VALUE OF
HOUSE WORK WHICH INCLUDES THINGS
LIKE CLEANING THE HOUSE AND
DUSTING, BUT ALSO INTERACTING
WITH OUR CHILDREN.
THAT'S A VALUE THAT'S IN THE
G.P.I.
>> Reporter: WHAT ABOUT AIR
POLLUTION FROM CARS, OR THE
AMOUNT OF TIME IT TAKES YOU TO
COMMUTE TO WORK?
>> COST OF COMMUTING IS
CONSIDERED IN THE G.P.I. AND
THAT IS ONE THAT'S HURTING
MARYLAND, BECAUSE HERE IN
MARYLAND WE SPEND MORE TIME IN
OUR CARS COMMUTING TO AND FROM
WORK THAN MOST STATES IN THE
NATION.
>> Reporter: BUT PEOPLE WILL
TELL YOU, A GREAT RADIO SHOW
COMES ON AND THEY GO: WAIT A
SECOND, I'M LISTENING TO N.P.R.
AND LOVING MY COMMUTE.
>> RIGHT, EXACTLY, TO SOME
DEGREE, WHAT WE DO WITH THE GPI
IS PUTTING A PRICE ON THE
UNPRICEABLE.
BUT AT LEAST WE'RE BEING
CONSISTENT AND SEEING WHETHER
THEY GO UP OR DOWN.
>> Reporter: MARYLAND'S G.P.I.
IS BOOSTED BY A HIGHLY EDUCATED
POPULATION BUT, REMEMBER, EVEN
HERE, G.P.I. HASN'T GONE UP AS
MUCH AS G.D.P., FOR YEARS.
WHY?
GOSHORN SAYS A BIG REASON IS
WHAT JOE STIGLI
2009: RISING ECONOMIC
INEQUALITY.
>> THE SAME AMOUNT OF MONEY
SPENT BY A FEW VERY WEALTHY
PEOPLE WOULD BE ATTRIBUTED
DIFFERENTLY TO THE G.P.I. THAN
AN EQ
LITTLE BIT BY A LOT OF PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: SO IMAGINE, IN THE
EXTREME, THAT ONE MARYLANDER
EARNED MOST OF THE STATE'S
MONEY, AND AMASSED A FLEET OF
FULLY LOADED MERCEDES SHE NEVER
DROVE WHILE THE REST WERE
REDUCED TO COMMUTING BY BUS.
IN THAT CASE G.D.P. MIGHT RISE,
SINCE CAR SALES BOOST THE VALUE
OF TOTAL OUTPUT, BUT OVERALL
WELFARE WOULDN'T.
ONE.
BUT EVEN THE B.E.A.'S STEVE
LANDEFELD AGREES.
>> DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME MAY BE
THE ANSWER TO ME OF THIS PROBLEM
OF THE DISCONNECT BETWEEN G.D.P.
AND G.D.P. PER CAPITA GOING UP,
AND MOST AMERICANS FEELING
>> Reporter: BUT LANDEFELD HAS
SERIOUS RESERVATIONS ABOUT
ALTERNATIVES LIKE THE G.P.I..
>> THE SUBJECTIVITY IS THE
ACHILLES HEEL
HOW MUCH DO I SUBTRACT FOR THE
COMMUTING TIME?
ND
IT'S ONE THING; MAYBE NOT.
THEY END UP BEING SYSTEMS OF
INDICATORS THAT ARE TROUBLING
FOR AN ECONOMIST WHO'S TRYING TO
PUT TOGETHER OBJECTIVE ACCOUNTS,
OR AT LEAST NOT MAKE NORMATIVE
JUDGMENTS ABOUT WHAT SHOULD BE.
>> Reporter: THEN AGAIN, ALL
ECONOMIC INDICATORS INVOLVE SOME
SUBJECTIVITY, SAYS ZACHARY
KARABELL
>> ONE SYNBER THAT
PURPORTS TO DESCRIBE LIVED
MAKE CHOICES ABOUT WHAT YOU
INCLUDE, WHAT DO YOU ADD, WHAT
DO YOU EXCLUDE, BECAUSE YOU
CAN'T INCLUDE EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter:ND S A
TO THE MAXIM, THAT THE BEST
THINGS IN LIFE, ARE FREE.
>> Ifill: THE G.D.P. REPORT FOR
THE FIRST QUARTER OF 2014 IS DUE
WEDNESDAY.
READ PAUL'S EXTENDED
CONVERSATION WITH AUTHOR ZACHARY
KARABELL ABOUT HOW RELYING ON AE
WILL REDUCE PROSPERITY OVER THE
LONG TERM.
THAT'S ON MAKING SENSE.
>> Woodruff: SOME
TO REPORT TODAY FROM THE WORLD
OF PUBLIC EDUCATION:
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN RECENT
YEARS, AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOLS
HAVE CRACKED A MILESTONE ON
GRADUATION RATES, REACHING 80%.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY,
AS PART OF OUR AMERICAN GRADUATE
PROJECT, A PUBLIC MEDIA
INITIATIVE FUNDED BY THE
CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING.
>> Brown: IN FACT 81% OF
AMERICAN HIGH SCHOO GRADUATED
ON TIME IN 2012.
THAT IS UP FROM 73% SIX
EARLIER.
THE REPORT IS BASED ON
STATISTICS FROM THE U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND
P AND AWNLOR OF
TODAY'S REPORT.
HE HAS BEEN ADVISOR TO THGRADUA.
WEWELCOME TO HIM.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: WHAT IS DRIVING GOT
NE WE GET THERE?
>> THE SIGNIFICANT GAINS IN
GRADUATION RATES HAVE BEEN AMONG
HISPANIC STUDENTS
AFRICAN-AMERICANS SINCE 2006.
THESE STUDENTS,
AFRICAN-AMERICANS AND 40% OF
HISPANICS WERE TRAPPED IN THE
DROPOUT FACTORY SCHOOLS
WAS 50-50 PROPOSITION WHERE
WHETHER YOU GRADUATED OR NOT.
NTO THESE PLACES AND
HALF OF CLASSMATES ARE NOT
FINISHING SCHOOL.
>> Brown: GIVE ME ANMPLE
OF A PLACE OR TWO THAT YOU SAW
THE DIFFERENCE.
EW YORK CITY HAD THE LARGE
URBAN SCHOOL DISTRICTS.
MUNITIES.E THEM UP TO SMALLER
SCHOOLS WITHIN SCHOOLS,
GRADE ACADEMIES.
MADE THEM MORE PERSONALIZED
LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS, WHERE
YOUNG PEOPLE COULD CONNECT TO
LEARNING IN WAYS THAT SHOWED
RELATIONSHIPS OF WHAT THEY WERE
LEARN FLG SCHOOL AND WHAT THEY
WANTED IN LIFE.
WE HAD DONE A STUDY
SILENT EPEMIC LISTENING TO
DROPOUTS ACROSS
THE UNITED STATES.
THEY TOLD US THE REASON THEY
LEFT IS BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T SEE
THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN CAREER
DREAMS AND CLASS ROOM
>> THERE IS STILL WORK TO DO.
THE GAPS OF LOW INCOME STUDENTS
AND HIGHER INCOME
PEERS UP ARE T 30ENTAGE
POINTS IN SOME STATES.
THE GRADUATE IN NEVADA IS 24%.
IN KANSAS S CAN AND MONTAN
77% AND 81% RESPECTIVELY.
WE HAVE HUGE STUDENTS IN
SCHOOLS?
YOU LOOK AT YOUR
THERE ARE SOME PLACES
APPROACHING THE 90% MARK OR
ABOVE IT AND THEN OTHERS BELOW
60%.
>> ONE IS THE AWARENESS OF THE
GAPS BETWEEN THE POPULATIONS.
WE CAN PREDICT AS EARLY AS LATE
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL AND MIDDLE
SCHO WARNING
ICATORS OF CONIC
ABSENTEEISM, POOR BEHAVIOR,
COURSE PERFORMANCE IN READING
AND MATH.
WHEN THE YOUNG PEOPLE ARE OF TRT
THEM THE SUPPORT THEY NEED.
WE'RE SEEING LARGE SYSTEMS
REFORM AND BE REDESIGNED IN WAYS
THAT THEY BECOME MORE
PEONALIZES IN
AND GRIT ANDHE T SKILLS
EMPLOYERS ARE LOOKING FOR.
>> Brown: I KNOW IT'S BEEN AN
EFFORT FOR A LONG TIME, AND I
READ IN YOUR REPORT IT'S BEEN
UNDERTAKEN BY FOUR PRESIDENTS?
>> TRUE.
>> Brown: WHY HAS IT TAKEN SO
LONG?
>> FOUR PRESIDENTS HAD THE SAME.
WE'VE HAD FLATLINING GRADUATION
RATES.
IN THE LAST DECADE WE INCREASE
ADD WEARNESS.
PEOPLE UNDERSTOOD WHO THE YOUNG
PEOPLE WERE, WHY THEY DROPPED
OUT FROM HIGH SCHOOL AND THAT
50% OF THE DROPOUTS WERE ONLY
FOUND IN 15% OF THE SCHOOLS.
SO IT SEEMED LIKE A
FIXABLE PROBLEM.
ALSO A CIVICAL PLAN
EMERGED.
GENERAL POWELL ASSEMBLED A GROUP
AND SAID LET'S TAKE THE GOAL
SERIOUSLY.
THE CLASS OF 2020 IS IN THIRD
WHAT DOES THE EVIDENCE TELL US
WHAT WE CAN DO TO KEEP
THOSE U.N. PEOPLE ON TRACK?
ALL THESE
ALIGNING AGAINST THE CAMPAIGN
AND PLAN OF ACTION BRONCHTS I
WONDER.
>> Brown: I WONDER NOW LOOKING
AHEAD TWO THINGS.
ONE, IS THERE ANY SENSE THAT THE
FACTOR WE REPORTED ON COMMON
CORE, A LOT OF CHANGES
INTRODUCES INTO THE SCHOO AROUNE
COUNTRY.
>> RIGHT.
THE GOOD NEWS IS THAT THE MOST
PROGRESS SINCE 2006 WAS RIGHT
DURING THE PERIOD WHEN
GRADUATING FROM HIGH SCHOOL
BECAME MORE COMPLICATED, MORE
DIFFICULT, MORE RIGOROUS MORE
AP COURSES, MORE COURSES
REQUIRED TO GRADUATE, EXIT EXAMS
TO GRADUATE.ND DISTRICTS ARE
RISING TO A STAN OF
EXCELLENCE.
THE COMMON CORE WILL USHER IN AN
ERA OF LEARNING AND
ACCOUNTABILITY IN WAYS WHERE
WE'LL KNOW THAT YOUNG PEOPLE
WHEN AKRON OR
ALBUQUERQUE ORANE IN THE
CO HIGH
STANDARD.
>> Brown: THAT GOES TO NOT
ONLY THE NUMBERS BUT THE QUALITY
OF EDUCATION WHICH IS STILL ON
>> YES.
>>HN BRIDGELAND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> NICE TO BE YOU WITH YOU.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ON THE
EDUCATION PAGE.
AGAIN, T
>> Woodruff:
DEVELOPMENT
A TORNADO DAMAGES HOMES AND
INJURED SEVERAL PEOPLE IN
TUPELO, MISSISSIPPI, A DAY AFTER
ANOTHER STORM BLASTED VILONIA,
ARKANSAS, KILLING 15 PEOPLE.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED NEW SANCTIONS ON
RUSSIAN LEADERS AND COMPANIES,
AMID NEW VIOLENCE IN EASTERN
UKRAINE.
AND THE NATIONAL BASKETBALL
ASSOCIATION SAID IT WILL MAKENTW
INVOLVING LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS
OWNER DONALD STERLING AND RACIST
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW, AMERICAN HISTORY
IN 17 SYLLABLES AND 140
CHARACTERS.
THAT'S THE AMBITIOUS PROJECT OF
AUTHOR AND HISTORIAN H.W.
BRANDS.
HE'S TAKEN TO TWITTER TO RECOUNT
EVERYTHING FROM THE
LOUISIANA PURCHASE TO THE CIVIL
WAR.
IN WHAT HE CALLS "HISTORY IN
HAIKU."
YOU CAN LISTEN TO JEFF'S
CONVERSATION W
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM A WHITE
HOUSE TASK FORCE ON HOW TO CURB
RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULTS ON
COLLEG
>> Ifi: ANllD I'M GWEN IFILL,
FOR ALL  US HERE ATHE T PBS